                                                    Heuristic Quantum Advantage with Peaked Circuits
                                            Hrant Gharibyan1 , Mohammed Zuhair Mullath1 , Nicholas E. Sherman1 , Vincent P. Su1 ,
                                                                  Hayk Tepanyan1 , and Yuxuan Zhang 2,3
                                                                                         1
                                                                                        BlueQubit
                                                                             San Francisco, CA 94105, USA
arXiv:2510.25838v1 [quant-ph] 29 Oct 2025




                                                                    2
                                                                      Department of Physics, University of Toronto
                                                                             Toronto, ON M5S 1A7, Canada
                                                                       3
                                                                         Vector Institute for Artificial Intelligence
                                                                            Toronto, ON M5G 0C6, Canada


                                                                                      October 31, 2025


                                                                                             Abstract
                                                   We design and demonstrate heuristic quantum advantage with peaked circuits (HQAP circuits)
                                               on Quantinuum’s System Model H2 quantum processor. Through extensive experimentation
                                               with state-of-the-art classical simulation strategies, we identify a clear gap between classical and
                                               quantum runtimes. Our largest instance involves all-to-all connectivity with 2000 two-qubit gates,
                                               which H2 can produce the target peaked bitstring directly in under 2 hours. Our extrapolations
                                               from leading classical simulation techniques such as tensor networks with belief propagation and
                                               Pauli path simulators indicate the same instance would take years on exascale systems (Frontier,
                                               Summit), suggesting a potentially exponential separation. This work marks an important
                                               milestone toward verifiable quantum advantage, as well as providing a useful benchmarking
                                               protocol for current utility-scale quantum hardware. We sketch our protocol for designing these
                                               circuits and provide extensive numerical results leading to our extrapolation estimates. Separate
                                               from our constructed HQAP circuits, we prove hardness on a decision problem involving generic
                                               peaked circuits. When both the input and output bitstrings of a peaked circuit are unknown,
                                               determining whether the circuit is peaked constitutes a QCMA-complete problem, meaning the
                                               problem remains hard even for a quantum polynomial-time machine under commonly accepted
                                               complexity assumptions. Inspired by this observation, we propose an application of the peaked
                                               circuits as a potentially quantum-safe encryption scheme [1–4]. We make our peaked circuits
                                               publicly available and invite the community to try additional methods to solve these circuits to
                                               see if this gap persists even with novel classical techniques.




                                                                                                1
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                        2

2 A Gap in Classical and Quantum Runtime for Solving Peaked Circuits                                  3

3 HQAP Circuit Protocol                                                                               5
  3.1 Tensor Patch Optimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       7
  3.2 Swap Transformations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      7

4 Benchmarking Classical Approaches for Solving Peaked Circuits                                       7
  4.1 Marginal attack strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    8
  4.2 Matrix Product State Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      9
  4.3 Tensor Network State and Belief Propagation Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          12
  4.4 Pauli Path Simulations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   15
  4.5 Attacking the Circuit Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    17

5 HQAP Circuits as a potential candidate for post-quantum encryption                          19
  5.1 Deciding whether a quantum circuit is peaked is QCMA-hard . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
  5.2 Symmetric encryption with HQAP circuits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

6 Discussion                                                                                         23

7 Open Peaked Circuits challenge                                                                     24


1    Introduction
Random circuit sampling (RCS) [5–7] has emerged as a primary benchmark for demonstrating
quantum computational advantage, exemplified by Google’s 2019 Sycamore experiment [8] and
later followed by USTC Zuchongzhi works [9, 10]. However, recent large-scale demonstrations from
Google’s Willow [11] and Quantinuum’s H-2 [12], while likely beyond classical simulation, expose a
fundamental limitation of random circuit sampling: verification through cross-entropy benchmarking
becomes exponentially expensive at large scales, rendering direct validation impossible.
    We present a scalable method for demonstrating heuristic quantum advantage using peaked
quantum circuits [13], circuits engineered to produce specific output bitstrings with anomalously
high probability compared to an truly random circuit but otherwise look random. The verification
protocol is straightforward: Alice constructs a peaked circuit knowing its peak bitstring, Bob executes
the circuit with his quantum computer measuring in the computational basis, and Alice verifies by
checking if Bob’s output matches the known peak. No exponential classical computation is required.
    Our contributions are threefold: (i) We develop scalable construction techniques for peaked circuits
at larger qubit counts and depths using methods related to identity obfuscation [14–16]. (ii) Through
extensive benchmarking, we demonstrate that our circuits resist state-of-the-art classical simulation
methods including matrix product states [17–20], tensor networks with belief propagation [19, 21],
and Pauli path simulators [22–29]. (iii) We motivate this construction further with hardness results
for a decision problem involving general peaked circuits. In particular, we prove that determining
whether an unknown circuit is peaked constitutes a QCMA-complete problem. Note that this is
separate from our definition of “solving” our HQAP circuits, where the input string is fixed to the all
zeros state.



                                                   2
     Peaked circuits broadly have mounting evidence for their hardness. Simulating random peaked
circuits is hard in the average case, analogous to RCS, particularly for circuits generated via post-
selection [30] and error correction codes [31]. Our theoretical results in this work further add to
the literature on hardness when the quantum circuit is peaked from a specific input bitstring to a
particular output bitstring. However, our primary contribution lies in demonstrating the empirical
difficulty of classically simulating circuits that not only admit efficient construction, but can also be
implemented on existing quantum hardware. The relationship between our practical construction and
the broader ensemble of peaked circuits remains an open question. In the absence of this theoretical
connection, we refrain from asserting strong classical intractability results, instead characterizing the
observed quantum-classical separation as a heuristic quantum advantage.
     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we summarize the empirical runtime
gap between quantum and classical resources needed to solve our peaked circuits. In Section 3, we
describe briefly the techniques used to construct these peaked circuits. In Section 4, we provide
additional background and details on the classical methods we implement for comparison. In section
5, we study a potential practical application of peaked circuits as a post-quantum cryptographic
primitive. We conclude in Section 6 and invite others to test other ways of finding the peak in
Section 7.


2    A Gap in Classical and Quantum Runtime for Solving Peaked
     Circuits
We start with our main result, which is an empirical gap in the time it takes to solve peaked circuits
that we have constructed. Though our methods can generalize to even larger circuits, we focus on
what is achievable on existing hardware, in particular Quantinuum’s H-2 processor [32] with 56
qubits and any-to-any connectivity. We create peaked circuits with 56 qubits and two-qubit gate
counts ranging from 200 up to 2000. The quantum run time is approximately a few hours, while
classical methods fail to extract the correct answer at around 700 RZZ gate circuits with reasonable
computational resources. We estimate the largest circuits would require millions of GPU hours.
    From Ref. [13], we take the following definition.
Definition 1.1 (Peaked Circuit). Given δ ∈ (0, 1], we call the unitary C δ-peaked if:

                                         max      |⟨s|C|0N ⟩|2 ≥ δ
                                       s∈{0,1}N


with a corresponding peak weight δs ≡ |⟨s|C|0N ⟩|2 . where s is the peaked bitstring. To “solve” a
peaked circuit means given C, e.g. a circuit description in terms of gates, one correctly identifies the
peaked bitstring s. For sufficiently small systems, one can compute the full statevector and compute
the maximal amplitude squared but this clearly does not scale well with system size. With access
to a quantum computer, one can simply run the circuit an O(1/δs ) times to observe a signal. Of
course, in the presence of noise, one may encounter an overhead in the required number of shots.




                                                     3
a)                                                      b)




                                                       c)




Figure 1: Gap in Classical and Quantum Runtimes for Solving 56 qubit HQAP Circuits.
a) We compare classical techniques (MPS, PPS and TNS+BP) with quantum techniques for solving
56 qubit, 10% peaked circuits with all-to-all connectivity. As number of RZZs increases, classical
methods require estimated millions of Nvidia H100 GPU hours, while the quantum device requires
less than 2 hours. More details on the classical methods can be found in section 4 b) The performance
of the quantum device drops with the growing number of RZZs in the HQAP circuit as expected,
with still strong signal of 5/1000 (correct) peak samples for a 2044 RZZ circuit. c) Actual results
from a single run on Quantinuum H2 for a 1917 RZZ peaked circuit, with 17/2000 correct peaked
bitstrings. To our knowledge no other device in the world can find the peak for HQAP circuits of
this scale and connectivity.

    The main technical contribution of this paper is to create trainable circuits which go beyond the
qubit count and depth of the results trained in Aaronson and Zhang [13]. Additionally, while the
method they found had δs which seemed nearly universal based on their training strategy, we have
greater flexibility in tuning the peak weight. We call these HQAP (Heuristic Quantum Advantage
Peaked) circuits as they demonstrate a large heuristic gap between classical and quantum runtimes
for solving them. More on the protocol of how we generate HQAP circuits can be found in Section 3.
    The size of the peak presents an interesting trade-off. Increasing δs means fewer shots would be
required, reducing the quantum runtime. On the other hand, one may worry that tuning it to be too
large may lead to classically exploitable structure in the circuit description. This is an open question,
and we invite curious researchers to participate in our open challenge (see Section 7). Without that
exploitable structure, one is forced to deal with generic approximate classical simulation methods.
Some of the leading ones include Matrix Product State (MPS) simulators [33], tensor network with
belief propagation (TN + BP) [19, 21], and Pauli path simulators (PPS) [22–29]. For more details
on our implementations and attack strategies, see Section 4.
    With the explicit goal of constructing the largest possible separation in classical and quantum
runtimes, we construct HQAP circuits that are designed to fit within the tolerance of existing
quantum hardware and find an extreme gap. The largest such instance features 56 qubits, 2044 two-
qubit gates, all-to-all connectivity and a peak weight δs ≈ 0.1. With these parameters, Quantinuum’s


                                                   4
H2 device can consistently detect the peak in under 2 hours with 1000 shots, assuming an average
speed of 3000 HQC/hour.
    On the classical side, we find that state-of-the-art simulation methods are only able to solve the
circuits up to ∼ 700 two-qubit gates within 10 hours. For HQAP circuits smaller than that, we find
a nice extrapolation of runtime with two-qubit gate count. Assuming such larger computations were
even feasible (e.g. with infinite memory and millions of CPUs or GPUs), our benchmarks estimate
that solving the largest circuit we ran on Quantinuum would take years even on a Frontier scale
supercomputer. More details on the classical methods used can be found in the section 4.
    Again, though these circuits lack any theoretical guarantees, we claim that this is a form of
heuristic quantum advantage, where there is an efficient verification protocol for the quantum device,
and as far as we know, classical methods fail to produce the same answer.


3        HQAP Circuit Protocol
The protocol to design the peaked circuits in this work is based on the construction discussed in Ref.
[13]. In that work, peaked circuits are composed of two main parts, a random quantum circuit R,
and a variationally parmaterized circuit P that serves as a peaking layer. Using gradient descent,
the parameters of P are trained so that the combined circuit, R followed by P , results in a peak
weight on a particular bitstring. When the depth of P exceeds the depth of R, the peaking can be
done trivially and to a peak weight of 1.1 The intuition for using this structure is that R mimics the
structure of random quantum circuits, and thus may be hard to simulate classically, even if the final
state is relatively simple to describe. This protocol has two main challenges when scaling to larger
circuits. First, as the circuits become larger, the presence of barren plateaus [34] makes training
difficult in general. Second, training the P requires simulating the full circuit, which can become
excessively expensive or even impossible in practice. These challenges limit the theoretical bound on
the gap between classical and quantum runtimes possible.
     Here, we improve upon this construction by extending both the depth and the width of such
circuits, primarily enabled by tensor network methods. By utilizing generic tensor contraction
functionality as in Quimb [35, 36], we can train R and P as in Ref. [13] for large qubit number as
long as they are sufficiently shallow. Such shallow peaked circuits are known to be easy to solve [37].
To increase the depth, we introduce a large, obfuscated identity block between R and P . In the worst
case, it has been shown that checking whether a quantum circuit is equivalent to the identity is a
QMA-complete problem [14], even when the circuit depth is shallow [38]. This indicates that identity
obfuscation could be a feasible direction for generating peaked circuits that cannot be simplified by
an attacker. In practice, to make the structure harder to reverse engineer, we employ a technique
we call Tensor Patch Optimization, which serves two purposes, patch sweeping and patch masking,
which will be explained shortly.

A word on notation. To enhance clarity in representing the sequential application of quantum
operations, we introduce the left-to-right composition operator ▷, defined by:

                                              U1 ▷ U2 ▷ U3 := U3 U2 U1

That is, U1 is applied first, followed by U2 , then U3 . This reverses the standard right-to-left ordering
of matrix multiplication to improve readability when reasoning about temporal circuit structure.
    1
        Assuming that the connectivity of P matches that of R†




                                                           5
Figure 2: Visual schematic of HQAP building. We include details of the circuit manipulations used
to scramble the circuit structure.


    Note that the identity block U ▷ U † implemented naively as gate-by-gate inversion is easy to
detect, so we obfuscate this exact structure. The full protocol to generate peaked circuits is illustrated
in Figure 2, and is summarized as

   • Train a shallow peaked circuit R ▷ P using the method in Ref. [13].

   • Insert an identity of the form U ▷ U † between R and P .

   • Apply sweeping to variational circuit parameters.

   • Apply masking to modify the connectivity and gate structure.

   • Apply swap transformations throughout the circuit.

The sweeping and masking, whose definition we will return to momentarily, can be done modularly
throughout the circuit. However, the swapping must be coordinated globally to preserve the action
of the unitary on the initial state. Let us denote the collective action of swapping, sweeping and
masking as T , then the final circuit has the form T [R] ▷ T [U ] ▷ U † ▷ P . Note that the last few circuit
deformation techniques can be applied in any order. Further details on the obfuscation strategies in
the protocol are discussed in the following sections.
    For our construction there exist, in principle, simplifications that may reduce the simulation
requirement. With knowledge of how they were constructed and subsequently modified, one can
trace out the simplifications. However, we expect that the series of changes are likely hard to reverse.
We have internally tested a number of strategies for attacking these circuits, which led us to the
current set of techniques we describe below. Abstractly, these can be thought of as methods to
make transpilation or finding an efficient contraction path of the quantum circuit more difficult.
We liken our scrambling techniques (swaps, sweeps, masks) to how hash functions build one-way
transformations. Our expectation is that while its non-trivial to prove how our scrambling techniques
make the final circuit irreversible to the original circuit, a lack of successful attempts to crack
them will eventually build conviction that our scrambling is in practice irreversible. That would be
analogous to how hash functions like SHA-1 and SHA-2 build irreversible 1-way protocols based on


                                                     6
many small iterations. Similarly, SHA-1 and SHA-2 lack rigorous proof of irreversibility. However,
the huge body of evidence shows that for all practical purposes they are hard to reverse. For this
same reason, we invite everyone to try to unscramble and break our HQAP circuits, see Section 7.

3.1   Tensor Patch Optimization
The idea of tensor patch optimization is to take a circuit and train a second variational circuit which
matches the unitary action of the first. More procedurally, one can isolate subcircuits, or subsets of
gates, and by finding an approximate substitute, locally deform them. A similar idea to this type of
obfuscation was discussed in Ref. [16], there called circuit unoptimization. These subcircuits are
unitary and can generally be treated as tensors Ti . The mathematical idea is to introduce a new
trainable patch T̃ (θ) which is trained to mimic the original patch by taking the trace fidelity as a
loss function
                                                   Tr[Ti† T̃ (θ)]
                                      L(θ) = 1 −                  ,                                 (1)
                                                        d
where d is the dimension of the full unitary Ti . Since Ti and T̃ (θ) are unitary, this loss function is
always in the interval [0, 1], and is 0 if and only if T̃ (θ) = Ti up to a global phase.
    Though mathematically similar problems, there are two ways we employ this technique. The first
we refer to as angle sweeping, where the variational patch has the same gates as the original patch,
but the parameters are first kicked away from their original values and then trained to increase the
fidelity. The second we call masking, where the trained patch actually has a different subcircuit
structure, where the set of gates may be different or acting in a different order. Both offer a way to
obfuscate structure that could potentially be used to simplify the circuit.
    For the purposes of making the circuit harder to simulate, it can actually be beneficial to
introduce a lossy approximation to the original patch. For example, when the loss function is small,
but non-zero, one can no longer find an equivalence, thus making the transpiler’s job harder.

3.2   Swap Transformations
The second obfuscation technique we employ is to apply a permutation enabled by a series of simple
swap transformations between two qubit wires. Let σ (i↔j) denote the unitary operation that swaps
the quantum states of qubits i and j. We define the action of this transformation on a circuit X as

                                   σ (i↔j) [X] := σ (i↔j)† Xσ σ (i↔j) ,                             (2)
    where Xσ denotes the circuit X with its qubit indices relabeled under the transposition (i ↔ j).
This can be interpreted either as a physical SWAP gate or as a virtual relabeling of the wire indices,
depending on the context (e.g., compilation vs. simulation)
    These swaps can be interspersed throughout the circuit as long as one is careful about appropriately
implementing the swaps and relabeling throughout. Such techniques make it difficult to design
tensor network ansatzes that retain small bond dimension. Additionally, it is useful to note that the
initial state is invariant under swaps, allowing all swaps at the beginning of the final transformed
circuit to be ignored.


4     Benchmarking Classical Approaches for Solving Peaked Circuits
In the context of quantum advantage, it is increasingly understood that compelling demonstrations
must not only exploit quantum computational power but also move beyond the reach of classical

                                                    7
simulation. For sampling problems, this often means operating at a scale where even the most
advanced classical techniques become infeasible due to computational or memory constraints. In
particular, state-vector simulations, which scale exponentially in the number of qubits, are ruled
out once the qubit count exceeds approximately 40. To test the classical hardness of our HQAP
circuit constructions, we focus on scalable attack strategies that aim to approximately reproduce key
features of the output distribution.
    This section is broadly divided into three parts. We start by briefly mentioning our primary
attack strategy, looking at marginal or single qubit expectation values. This, in general, may not
always converge to the correct answer, but is a general purpose approach that is simple to understand
and can work when there is sufficient weight in the peak bitstring. In the case of examples we have
run on quantum hardware, where we want the peak to be large enough to be detectable, this is a
reasonable strategy.
    We subsequently explain the state-of-the-art classical methods used to implement this strategy.
Details on simulation techniques are included. Because they fail to correctly output the target
bitstring on moderately sized circuits with hundreds of two-qubit gates, we explain how our runtime
extrapolations to the largest HQAP circuit sizes of ∼ 2000 two-qubit gates are calculated.
    Importantly, these benchmarks of scaling generally serve as a lower bound on the time needed
to use these classical methods as an attacker. Because we built the circuits to encode a particular
bitstring, we are able to search for the minimal computational requirements needed to reproduce
that answer. However, from the perspective of the attacker, these methods do not readily come with
convergence guarantees, apart from doing full exact simulation.
    To give a sense of the classical computational resources used to reproduce these results, we spent
thousands of A100 and H100 GPU hours and tens of thousands of CPU hours to solve the peaked
circuits with the best known classical techniques. For statevector simulation we have been using
qsim by Google on CPUs [39] and cuQuantum by Nvidia on GPUs [40]. For MPS, Tensor Network
and Belief Propagation we used the quimb library on H100 GPUs [35, 36]. For Pauli path simulation
we have been using a newly developed GPU implementation on H100 GPUs. All of the classical
experiments have been orchestrated using the BlueQubit platform.
    Finally, we explore solution strategies that exploit the structure of the circuit directly, bypassing
the need for brute-force simulation. While our circuits do not yet guarantee security against all such
attacks, we present evidence of baseline structural resistance.

4.1   Marginal attack strategies
Sampling from the output distribution of a general quantum circuit is widely believed to be classically
intractable. In the average case, even approximate sampling to small total variation distance is
believed to be classically intractable, and under plausible assumptions such as the non-collapse of
the polynomial hierarchy, this forms the basis of most near-term quantum advantage proposals. For
random peaked circuits, it has been shown that simulating the output distribution of peaked circuits
to 1/ exp{poly(N )} precision is average case #P hard; relaxing this precision to 1/poly(N ), in the
worst case the problem is still BQP-complete, and for any sequential simulator it is average case
BQP-complete under plausible complexity assumptions [30]. Similar hardness results have been
observed in other types of peaked circuits [31]. Nevertheless, in this work there is a caveat one
could leverage: our task is just to ‘identify the peaked strings’, leaving room for spoofing. Although
exact evaluation of expectation values of arbitrary circuits is computationally prohibitive, estimating
approximate expectation values, particularly of low-weight observables or marginal distributions,
is often significantly more tractable for classical algorithms, especially when the circuit depth is
moderate or its structure is constrained, such as in circuits with shallow magic depth [41].


                                                   8
    The idea is relatively straightforward. If there is sufficient bias in the peak, then approximate
expectation values, as long as they get the correct sign, can be used to attack or reconstruct what the
peak bitstring is. Of course, as circuits get deeper, even getting approximate expectation values can
be difficult. Indeed, for our largest circuits, our classical methods cannot solve them. Nonetheless,
we introduce some of our notation that will be useful in describing their (lack of) success.
    For sufficiently large peak weight δs , it is straightforward to observe that each of the bits
will have marginal distributions p(bi ) which are heavily biased towards the true value si . This is
straightforwardly related to the Z expectation value

                                                       1 + ⟨Zi ⟩
                                         p(bi = 0) =             .                                   (3)
                                                          2
Thus, by coming up with estimates for ⟨Zi ⟩, e.g. with approximate tensor network methods, one can
construct a candidate bitstring ŝ by looking at the sign of each ⟨Zi ⟩. We refer to this as the marginal
attack. From an attacker’s perspective, this is not guaranteed to work. Indeed, one can manipulate
the peak weight and the distribution so that marginals, even if calculated correctly, would give
the wrong result. However, for the purposes of the classical benchmarks we present here, we have
constructed the circuits so that the marginals are correctly lined up with the target bitstring.
    To keep track of the accuracy, one can consider the overlap (or inverse hamming distance)
O = N − |s − ŝ|1 , or similarly, the fraction of correct bits R = O/N . Note that for a random guess
one expects R = 0.5, and R = 1 is only achieved if s = ŝ.
    Interestingly, this attack strategy can also be used when looking at empirical or approximately
generated samples, and corresponds to majority vote on each qubit.
    For the largest circuits, our experiments are dominated by noise with minimal or no signal at all
R ≲ 0.5. For this reason, we study circuits of different sizes and compute R. We then define Tbreak
as the minimum time needed to achieve R = 1, or a quantity such as χbreak defined as the smallest
bond-dimension needed to achieve R = 1 for MPS and TNS simulations. Since the runtime and
accuracy for simulating a circuit is fully characterized by the bond-dimension χ, there is a direct
relationship between tbreak and χbreak .
    One can play a similar game with access to multi-qubit observables, though these in general will
not be any easier to calculate than single qubit observables. When dealing with samples, whether
approximate or empirical, one can implement many classical post-processing schemes. They may
consider correlations or do majority votes on subsets of bits rather than single bits. However, finding
an optimal strategy when there are conflicts is also very difficult.

4.2   Matrix Product State Simulations
MPS has revolutionized the study of 1D quantum systems [33]. Its power for capturing and studying
entanglement has thus become a standard tool in the kit of many quantum practitioners. MPS
allows a dial between efficiency and expressibility through a simple parameter, the bond dimension
χ.
    Our peaked circuits are explicitly designed with all-to-all connectivity. Thus, one would not
expect MPS to be particularly well suited to simulate them. However, they serve as a baseline
simulation method for understanding the classical difficulty. In particular because producing the
correct the peak bitstring could be spoofed by a low rank MPS that is far from the true final state.
One could worry that basic MPS simulation may crack the circuits. We find this naive method works
up to a point. Beyond 600 two-qubit gates, however, MPS fails to predict the correct bitstring.
    Because MPS works best for states with area law entanglement in 1D, the explicit transpilation
of a circuit with long-range entangling gates to a chain layout can greatly affect the performance.

                                                   9
Figure 3: Estimating χbreak . By tracking the accuracy R as a function of χ, we find 3 cases. The
black curve is an example of a circuit where χbreak is found exactly. For the blue curve, the χbreak
is not found exactly, and so we fit the data to find R̂(χ) and extrapolate to estimate χbreak , and
show the fit with a dashed line. Lastly, the gray curve is an example of a circuit our fitting protocol
rejects when estimating χbreak .


In the worst case, a naive permutation of an otherwise local 1D chain can make MPS simulation
struggle. To define the ordering of the qubits, we look at the adjacency matrix for our quantum
circuit and use the Reverse Cuthill-McKee (RCM) algorithm [42] to define a global permutation
to our circuit. The RCM algorithm defines a reordering of an adjacency matrix to minimize the
bandwidth of the matrix and hence the maximum distance between qubits that interact.
    To produce extrapolation estimates for our largest circuits, we study the relationships between
bond dimension, circuit depth, simulation time, and accuracy of the predicted answer. We define
χbreak as the minimum bond-dimension needed to yield the correct bitstring for a given circuit. For
small circuits, this is found explicitly through simulation. For larger circuits, this can be extrapolated
by looking at the trend of R, the correct fraction of bits, as a function of increasing χ.
    For a given circuit, we perform MPS simulation with bond dimension increasing in powers of
2. If the circuit is cracked, we perform binary search to find χbreak . The maximum χ used in our
experiments varies by circuit with χ = 5000 the largest bond-dimension used. If the circuit remains
uncracked for all χ studied, we perform an automated fitting procedure to determine R̂(χ). We
assume a linear fit in log χ, weighted more heavily towards large values of χ and reject fits that yield
a correlation coefficient of r2 < 0.8, or those that show a negative slope. We show examples of R(χ)
for three circuits, one which was cracked exactly, one which we successfully extrapolate R(χbreak ),
and one which we reject.
    Our peaked circuit construction allows us to control the RZZ gate count. However, there is some
variability in the resulting χbreak due to the stochastic nature of the training. Thus, for a given circuit
depth, we apply this extrapolation procedure to five instantiations, reporting both the average χbreak
as well as the standard deviation in the log. For accessible system sizes, we observe exponential
scaling in the necessary bond dimension as a function of circuit depth, as might be expected for
random circuits before the bond dimension saturates at its maximal value χsat = 2N/2 ≃ 108 [33].
See Fig. 4. Interestingly, our extrapolated answer for χbreak on our deepest circuits reaches beyond
this χmax , giving evidence for the difficulty of MPS to crack our system sizes.
    Ultimately, one cares not only about the memory requirements determined by χ but also the
total runtime of the classical method. To this end, we also study the time T to simulate these circuits


                                                    10
Figure 4: Benchmarking of bond dimension and time required to simulate peaked circuits of increasing
depth with MPS. (a) Bond dimension vs two-qubit gate count. Black dots indicate MPS simulations
that converged exactly, while white dots indicate circuit samples where the extrapolation procedure
in Fig. 3 was used. Blue dots indicate the transition where some circuits of that size were fully solved.
The red dashed line shows the exponential fit, while the solid purple line shows the χ corresponding
to exact simulation. (b) Gate simulation cost for increasing χ. We study how the simulation time
grows with increasing bond dimension, normalized by the number of gates. The large χ behavior is
modeled by by a cubic function of χ. (c) We plot the solution time Tbreak in hours as a function of
circuit depth. Exact answers (black dots) can be read off, while white dots are extrapolated by using
χ̂break and the time conversion in (b). The red dashed line is an exponential fit for Tbreak compared
with circuit depth. The purple dashed line is the estimate for the runtime of a depth 2000 circuit
with χsat .




                                                   11
as a function of χ, normalized by the circuit depth. The runtime is dominated by the operations of
applying a gate which scales as χ2 , and the subsequent SVD which scales as χ3 . We use this fact
to fit our data to a functional form T /RZZ ∼ aχ2 + bχ3 , and show the fit in Figure 4. Combined,
these give a way to extrapolate the total runtime needed for our deepest circuits. Assuming one
even has access to enough memory to run the simulation, we can use this relation to estimate Tbreak
based on χsat for our largest circuits.

4.3   Tensor Network State and Belief Propagation Simulations
Despite the success of MPS simulations in studying quantum dynamics in one-dimensional systems
with local interactions, systems with higher-dimensions and long-range interactions have still remained
a major hurdle in the field. A common approach has been to simply map such systems to quasi-one-
dimensional systems at the cost of long-range interactions, as discussed in Section 4.2. Other tensor
network methods such as projected entangled-pair states (PEPS) [18, 43] have been popular for
studying the many-body dynamics of two-dimensional lattices, such as for a square lattice, and easily
extend to arbitrary geometries. However, extracting useful quantities, such as local observables,
from the final state remains difficult in general due to the complexity of the resulting tensor network
contraction. The complexity of local measurements disappears in MPS systems by using the gauge
freedom of the MPS ansatz to bring an MPS state into a canonical form [33]. Once in this form,
local observables can be computed by a tensor contraction involving O(1) site tensors rather than a
full network contraction.
    Recently, belief propagation (BP) has been proposed as a method to gauge a generic Tensor
Network State (TNS) to address this problem [19, 21]. BP is a set of equations for message tensors
that can be solved self-consistently, whose fixed point defines a gauge transformation that brings the
TNS into the Vidal gauge [44–47]. This procedure is known to be exact for tensor networks on a
tree graph, and while approximate for loopy graphs, often leads to accurate results in practice.
    Despite the benefits of TNS evolution and BP, this framework requires performing matrix
decompositions on tensors, like QR or SVD, that scale as χz for geometries with a coordination
number z. For two-dimensional systems with z ≃ 4, this scaling is manageable enough to lead to
dramatic improvements in both accuracy and efficiency over traditional MPS-based simulations.
However, for circuits with all-to-all connectivity, like the circuits studied here, the scaling becomes
infeasible as z → N for a naive use of this method.
    To remedy this, we define a simpler topology with a reduced coordination number, and then
transpile the circuit to this simpler topology. This can be thought of as a generalization of what
is done for MPS-based simulations, where the simpler topology is a chain. Once transpiled, we
then perform the simulation using a generic TNS that matches the topology of the resulting circuit.
With this increased flexibility comes the difficulty of picking a particular layout. There is a tradeoff
between a simpler topology with a reduced z, allowing for more efficient tensor operations, and the
increase in gate count from the added swap gates to perform the routing.
    The limitless options for both topology and bond dimension of the ansatz are further complicated
by the use of BP at the end to compute the one-qubit marginals. For example, when using a k-regular
graph with 3 ≤ k ≤ 6, we found surprisingly that increasing χ for TNS states can actually lead to
lower accuracy with respect to the true expectation values. This is in sharp contrast with the MPS
case where performance is expected to be monotonic in χ. We believe this is due to the increase in
long-range and loopy correlations throughout circuit simulation, which can spoil the accuracy of BP
for computing the marginals [19, 21].
    Given the stark effect of topology on the quality of the final answer, we found the most successful
results using a tree tensor network. Notably, the lack of loops in the tree network satisfy a core


                                                  12
Figure 5: Example of the tree-like graph that we transpile our all-to-all circuits to before performing
TNS simulations. The lack of loops lead to confidence in the convergence of BP for computing
marginals in the tensor network state.


assumption of BP. This led to the desirable property that increasing bond dimension did lead to
more accurate marginals. In the tradeoff of gate transpilation and topology, we found reasonable
results using a graph with three binary trees stemming from the root. All reported TNS simulations
we benchmark use this graph. See Figure 5 for an illustration.
    We perform the transpilation using the Qiskit package [48], and the gate evolution was done
using the simple update algorithm [49, 50] with the ’reduced tensor’ method [21]. Once we have an
approximate TNS representing the final state of the circuit, we perform BP to bring the TNS into
an approximate canonical form, allowing us to efficiently approximate ⟨Zq ⟩ for each qubit q.
    We then apply the marginal attack strategy discussed in Section 4.1. We also considered a
greedy, iterative approach to generate a proposed bitstring ŝ. Rather than computing all marginals
independently, one first selects the most biased marginal, and then fixes the tensor network based
on the most likely bit. After fixing that bit, we re-run BP and compute the remaining marginals,
conditioned on the outcome of the previous bits, and continue this process until all bits are fixed,
defining ŝ. We then find R of correct bits for both procedures, and use whichever method yielded a
more accurate proposal.
    Analogous to our MPS simulations, χbreak is determined by R(χbreak ) = 1. For sufficiently
small circuits, we can compute χbreak exactly, while for larger circuits we rely on fitting R̂(χ) and
extrapolate to approximate χbreak . In Figure 6, we show χbreak for peaked circuits with N = 56 and
a range of RZZ gates.
    Lastly, we create a conversion from χbreak → Tbreak in the same way as we did for the MPS
simulations described in Section 4.2. The runtime is dominated by the operations of applying a gate
which scales as χ2 , and the subsequent SVD which scales as χ3 . We use this fact to fit our data to a
functional form T /RZZ ∼ aχ2 + bχ3 . This fit allows us to extrapolate for larger χ to estimate the
runtime for larger circuits. We note that from our fit of T (χ), the large χ scaling is only present for
χ ≳ 256. This leads to exponential scaling for Tbreak (RZZ) to only be visible for RZZ ≳ 550. Due
to limited data in this regime, the estimated Tbreak should be treated as a rough estimate.




                                                  13
Figure 6: Memory and time extrapolations for TNS simulations. Notably, the TNS can crack circuits
much more efficiently than in the case of MPS. However, we still find an exponential trend in the
memory and time requirements. In the case of the network comprised of 3 binary trees, χsat is
determined by the size of the largest binary tree in Fig. 5. Though the χsat is lower than in the MPS
case, the required memory is comparable. Using the extrapolations with χrmsat , we estimate that
Tbreak for TNS simulations would take about 3 × 108 hours for a 2000 RZZ circuit, assuming the
calculation would even fit in memory.




                                                 14
4.4    Pauli Path Simulations
Pauli Path Simulation (PPS) is a relatively new method to classicaly compute observable expectations
through backward evolution of the circuit gates on the Pauli basis [22–29]. We leverage a state of
the art GPU-accelerated version of this to implement the marginal, or ⟨Z⟩, attack.
    A counterintuitive finding of Ref. [28], is that the convergence patterns of observables as a
function of coefficient truncation parameter ∆ is highly unpredictable. In the context of solving
peaked circuits, this makes it difficult to predict, even for one ⟨Zi ⟩, what value of ∆ will be sufficient
to get an accurate expectation value. While intuitively one might expect smaller ∆ should yield a
more accurate answer, the deviations are non-monotonic, and thus a smaller ∆ may actually be less
accurate than a larger ∆.
    The way we then choose to extrapolate the difficulty is by looking for convergence of the
expectation value of each ⟨Zi ⟩ to the correct sign and, hence, bit value. This assumption is then a
lower bound on the time it would take to crack with this strategy since it equips the attacker with
the most information possible. As in the MPS case, we are using our knowledge of the true answer
for extrapolation purposes. A priori, without the ground truth, confidence in the convergence can be
very difficult to establish [28].
    To be slightly more precise, we compute ⟨Z       ˆ i ⟩ for each qubit with geometrically decreasing
truncation parameters ∆j . We check that i) the sign has converged for 3 successive ∆j and is the
correct value and ii) that the expectation value exceeds a certain fraction of the operator weight
that survives the truncation.
    An interesting feature we notice when implementing this strategy is that there is generically
a large gap between qubits that are easy to crack and those that are difficult. As can be seen
from Figure 7 some qubits take more time to converge and crack, but the overall hardness grows
exponentially with the number of 2-qubit gates in the circuit, as expected.




Figure 7: Required runtimes to crack individual bits of the peak bistring for 56-qubit HQAP circuit
with varying RZZs going from 162 to 782 with PPS (standard coefficient truncation) on an H100
GPU. Qubit indices are ordered by difficulty (runtime to crack). We vary the truncation parameter
∆ from 3.2 × 10−3 to 2.5 × 10−5 in powers of 2.




                                                    15
Figure 8: Plot showing exponential growth in runtime to crack bits of different difficulty levels for
circuits with up to 824 RZZ gates. For this plot, we used the relative truncation method described
in this section, and we tracked up to 1 billion Pauli terms, using ∼96 GB of memory on an H100
GPU. We note that solving qubits with index 55 amounts to fully solving the peaked circuit.

    While PPS is very effective in shallower regimes and we can crack all 56 bits up to 388 RZZ
HQAP circuit, memory very quickly becomes a constraint. Consequently, it was not feasible to
explore truncation thresholds lower than 10−5 for these circuits, as the number of Paulis approached
the memory limit (∼1 billion Paulis). This is why the HQAP circuits after 388 RZZ have higher
qubits missing from the plot in Figure 7.
    One of the issues we encountered while running PPS with standard coefficient truncation for
larger peaked circuits (with RZZ-count > 600) was that all the Pauli terms would get truncated
midway through the simulation. The reason for this is the following: there are long stretches in the
circuit where there is extensive branching and negligible merging of Paulis, resulting in rapid decay
of all Pauli coefficients.
    We briefly outline a modification to the coefficient truncation method devised to mitigate this issue
and (potentially) yield a non-zero expectation value at the end of each PPS run. The modification,
which we call relative truncation, is rather simple: after the k-th gate application, we drop only those
Pauli strings P whose coefficients cP satisfy

                                            |cP | ≤ ∥Ok ∥∆,

where ∥Ok ∥ is the normalized Frobenius norm of the evolved Pauli-sum after k steps of the simulation.
This simple modification dynamically lowers the effective truncation threshold from ∆ to ∥Ok ∥∆, and
when more and more Pauli terms are dropped, resulting in a decline in ∥Ok ∥, we end up truncating
fewer Pauli terms than we would otherwise have.
    We also noticed an improvement in accuracy for the computed expectation values with this
method, even after accounting for the fact that the new method utilizes more Pauli terms for a given
threshold ∆ compared to standard truncation.

                                                   16
Figure 9: Comparison of change in observable norm ∥Ok ∥ and number of Pauli terms during the
computation of ⟨Z0 ⟩ for both standard and relative coefficient truncation schemes for a circuit with
536 RZZ gates, and for threshold ∆ = 2 × 10−4 . With standard coefficient truncation, we see that
the number of Paulis decline rapidly in the latter half of the simulation, with only a couple of dozen
terms remaining towards the end, whereas with relative truncation there are still around a million
Pauli terms retained at the end, thereby improving the accuracy of the simulation.


4.5   Attacking the Circuit Structure
We have examined the computational requirements for direct classical simulation of the circuit.
While this provides a useful baseline, we recognize that targeted attacks exploiting specific circuit
structures could potentially reduce these computational requirements. We present an initial analysis
of several such attack vectors and discuss how the techniques introduced in Section 2 - swapping,
sweeping, and masking - may offer some protection against them.
    To illustrate these concepts, we analyze a simplified test case: a circuit constructed as U ▷ U † (a
random unitary circuit followed by its adjoint). This allows us to verify that our methods pass a
baseline level of resistance to these attacks, though we emphasize that making stronger guarantees
on the difficulty remains an open question.
    Correlating angles For a random circuit that is comprised of multiple variational gates, the
angles of gates in U † will mirror those in the first half of the circuit. Thus, even though swaps
were employed throughout, this would effectively allow someone to reverse engineer the resulting
permutation. However, with tensor patch optimization used for the purpose of angle sweeping, we
find that with a sufficient number of sweeps, one can hide the apparent correlations between different
parts of the circuit. See Fig. 10.




                                                  17
Figure 10: Angle sweeping. Taking a brickwork of two qubit gates and one qubit gates, we show the
drift of angles from their original values after successive rounds of sweeping. The dashed indicates
perfectly matching the original distribution.

    Correlating gate connectivity Beyond the angles themselves, one may hope to unravel the
circuit by looking at the gate connectivity in different parts of the circuit. The swaps and permutations
make immediate cancellations less obvious, but one could try to reveal the permutations by identifying
the relabeling. An attacker could potentially use the connectivity of the gates themselves, e.g. by
looking at pairs of qubits that receive two-qubit interactions. Doing this identification would
essentially be solving graph isomorphism, which is in NP, though not NP-complete. However, with
the addition of masking, which replaces a subset of gates with a different set of gates, connectivity
changes can be introduced, leading to an even more difficult version of the problem.
    Transpiler simplifications A primary sanity check of these techniques is to make transpilers,
such as the one in Qiskit [48], struggle to identify and simplify the identity block. To illustrate
the efficacy of the compiler, we perform a simple test in which an increasing number of swap
transformations are enacted in a densely packed all-to-all random circuit and its inverse. Here, every
layer contains N/2 two-qubit gates where neighbors are determined by taking a random permutation
and pairing sequential qubits. Indeed, before any swap transformations are introduced, the transpiler
can find the full simplification, eliminating all two-qubit gates.
    While one may expect that the swaps have a gradual effect on the size of remaining gates which
were not transpiled away, we find that actually the difficulty jumps relatively quickly. One can think
of this swap interaction as being a bottleneck in the simplification of the full circuit. Thus, even a
few bottlenecks may lead to a large fraction of gates surviving in the lightcone of those swaps.



                                                   18
Figure 11: Transpiling away the identity. We show the difficulty of transpilers in simplifying these
circuits. We start with an identity circuit comprised of U and U † . The qiskit transpiler easily
identifies it and reduces it. We then implement a series of swap transformations gradually and show
the fraction of two qubits that survive the transpilation.

    Middle MPO Attack To test the resiliency of our HQAP circuits, we employ a MPO compression
technique we call the middle MPO attack. To build intuition, consider how time evolution is applied
to MPS. A gate gets applied as a tensor operation before performing compression back to the MPS
form, possibly with higher bond dimension. Our MPO attack is based on a similar principle, except
it can be in the middle of the circuit (with gates before and after), as opposed to an MPS with all
gates in the future.
    This attack is particularly well suited for circuits which build up the identity from a sequence of
random gates followed by the adjoint sequence. By starting with a rank 1 MPO object initialized to
the identity in the middle of the circuit, joint evolution of gates on either side results in an MPO
which is again representable with low rank since it remains the identity. Repeating this reveals that
the whole circuit indeed has a much simpler representation and does not require simulation with
exponentially large dimension.
    The combination of sweeping, masking, and applying permutations has thus far prevented this
attack from successfully compressing the circuit. This shows that HQAP circuits may remain hard
even when the boundary between where T (U ) ends and U † begins is known. Though it is known that
worst-case identity checking is QMA complete [14], an open direction of importance is understanding
how our version of identity obfuscation compares. In the meantime, we invite practictioners to try
this and other strategies in our online portal. See Section 7.


5    HQAP Circuits as a potential candidate for post-quantum encryp-
     tion
Throughout the work, we have studied the hardness of finding the peak when the input state is
known and set to the all-0 bitstring. In this section, we discuss the possibility of using HQAP circuits
as a post-quantum cryptographic protocol [1]. We first prove that, for generic quantum circuits,
deciding whether a given input circuit is peaked is QCMA-complete. Note this decision problem of
distinguishing peaked circuits differs from the task we consider in the previous sections, which is to
produce the peaked bitstring given a circuit that is peaked. Therefore, unless BQP = QCMA, which
is unlikely to be true under standard complexity assumptions, even a quantum computer cannot
distinguish a peaked circuit from a non-peaked one. As a corollary, finding the input computational
basis on which a circuit is peaked is hard even for a quantum computer. This provides a necessary

                                                  19
condition that HQAP-based encryption can be secure: an efficient adversary without the trapdoor
cannot even decide peakedness with non-negligible advantage, let alone recover the planted input
string and obtaining the encrypted output string or weight.
    On the other hand, the obfuscation protocol we build in this work permits efficient generation
and would generate a non-negligible signal for a designated input-output string pair. Therefore, if
there exists an HQAP algorithm such that “finding the input string on which the circuit is peaked” is
sufficiently hard on average, we can realize a post-quantum encryption scheme by treating the input
state as a secret trapdoor: the encryption party publishes an obfuscated, peaked circuit for the target
string, while the decryption party applies the trapdoor to recover it. In this case, correctness follows
from peakedness, and security reduces to the hardness of learning the peak without the trapdoor.

5.1   Deciding whether a quantum circuit is peaked is QCMA-hard
To this end, we cast the task of distinguishing a peaked circuit from a non-peaked one as the following
decision problem:

Definition 5.1 (Peakedness check on basis states (PCBS)). Let U be an n-qubit unitary and fix
thresholds 1 ≥ δyes > δno ≥ 0 with δyes − δno ≥ 1/poly(N ). The promise problem PCBS asks to
decide whether

         YES: ∃ y ∈ {0, 1}N with |⟨y|U |y⟩| ≥ δyes        vs   NO: ∀ y ∈ {0, 1}N , |⟨y|U |y⟩| ≤ δno .

    Next, we introduce a complexity class called QCMA. Intuitively, QCMA is the probabilistic
version of NP (more formally, MA) with a quantum verifier and a classical witness.

Definition 5.2 (QCMA). Fix completeness–soundness thresholds 1 ≥ c > s ≥ 0 with gap c − s ≥
1/poly(N ). A language L ⊆ {0, 1}⋆ is in QCMA if there is a classical, polynomial-time uniform
generator that, on input x, outputs a polynomial-size quantum verifier circuit Wx acting on registers

  Y (witness, Nx qubits),    A (ancillas, Mx qubits initialized to 0Mx ),           B (one-qubit output),

such that
                YES: ∃ y ∈ {0, 1}Nx Pr B=1 after Wx on |y⟩Y 0Mx A |0⟩B ≥ c,
                                                                     

                 NO: ∀ y ∈ {0, 1}Nx Pr B=1 after Wx on |y⟩Y 0Mx A |0⟩B ≤ s.
                                                                     

Equivalently, writing ΠB := |1⟩⟨1|B and ρy := |y⟩⟨y|Y ⊗ 0Mx             0Mx A ⊗ |0⟩⟨0|B , the conditions are
tr(Wx ρy Wx† ΠB ) ≥ c vs. ≤ s.


Theorem 5.3 (PCBS is QCMA-complete). PCBS is QCMA-complete under a polynomial-time
reduction.

    From the definition it is clear that PCBS has the right flavor for QCMA: in QCMA the verifier’s
acceptance probability on some classical witness separates YES and NO instances; in PCBS we
ask whether some diagonal entry of U is large. First, it’s easy to see the containment of PCBS ∈
QCMA: a QCMA verifier uses y as the witness and estimates Pr[meas. y after U |y⟩] = |⟨y|U |y⟩|2 by
sampling; since δyes
                 2 − δ 2 ≥ 1/poly(N )2 , this is distinguishable in poly time.
                        no
    Next, we show QCMA-hardness via a gadget that maps acceptance probabilities of any QCMA
witness circuit U to solving PCBS problem on an embedded larger circuit Z. This proof is inspired
by [51].


                                                     20
Theorem 5.4. Let U be a circuit on registers (Y, A, B) and let P := ΠB=1 . For a basis witness y,
define
                             p(y) := y, 0a , 0 U † P U y, 0a , 0 ∈ [0, 1].
                                                                   
                                                      cos ϕ − sin ϕ
Fix 0 < ϕ < π2 and the one-qubit rotation R(ϕ) =                        on a marker qubit C. Define
                                                      sin ϕ cos ϕ
 R1 := apply R(ϕ) to C controlled on (A=0a ),               R2 := apply R(−ϕ) to C controlled on (B=1),
and introduce a fresh guard qubit D (initialized to |0⟩) with the unitary
                   G := XD ⊗ IY ABC − |0a 0⟩⟨0a 0|AB + ID ⊗ |0a 0⟩⟨0a 0|AB .
                                                         

Next, we set
                                           Z := U † R2 U R1 G.
For the canonical basis state |z⟩ := |0⟩C |0⟩D ⊗ |y, 0a , 0⟩Y AB we have
                                        2                              2
                                ⟨z|Z|z⟩ = p(y) + (1 − p(y)) cos ϕ .                                       (4)
Moreover, for any basis state |z ′ ⟩ with (A, B) ̸= (0a , 0), that is: when the ancillas are not in the
canonical input staes
                   z′ Z z′    = 0        (since G flips D to an orthogonal basis state).                  (5)

YES bound.        If there exists y with p(y) ≥ 1 − ε, then for the corresponding canonical |z⟩,
                                                       2                    2
                                2
                       ⟨z|Z|z⟩ ≥ (1 − ε) + ε cos ϕ         = 1 − ε(1 − cos ϕ) .                           (6)

NO bound.       If for all y we have p(y) ≤ ε, then for every canonical |z⟩,
                                                         2
                                  2                                        2
                           ⟨z|Z|z⟩ ≤ ε + (1 − ε) cos ϕ       ≤ cos ϕ + ε .                                (7)

Proof. Step 0 (apply G). Recall Z = U † R2 U R1 G, so G acts first. If (A, B) = (0a , 0), G is the
identity and the analysis below applies unchanged. If (A, B) ̸= (0a , 0), i.e., in the non-canonical
input case, then G flips D; since the rest of the circuit acts trivially on D, ⟨z ′ |Z|z ′ ⟩ = 0, proving (5).
     In the canonical case, we expand U |y, 0a , 0⟩ = c1 |1⟩B |ψ1 ⟩ + c0 |0⟩B |ψ0 ⟩, with |c1 |2 = p(y) and
     2
|c0 | = 1 − p(y).
     Step 1 (apply R1 ). Since A = 0a on the canonical input, R1 rotates the marker: |0⟩C 7→ |c0 ⟩C :=
R(ϕ)|0⟩ = cos ϕ |0⟩ + sin ϕ |1⟩.
     Step 2 (apply U ). We get
                    |c0 ⟩C ⊗ U |y, 0a , 0⟩ = c1 |c0 ⟩C ⊗ |1⟩B |ψ1 ⟩ + c0 |c0 ⟩C ⊗ |0⟩B |ψ0 ⟩.
   Step 3 (apply R2 controlled on B = 1). On the B=1 branch the marker sees R(−ϕ), so
R(−ϕ)R(ϕ)|0⟩ = |0⟩; on the B=0 branch nothing happens. Hence the joint state becomes
                                   c1 |0⟩C |1⟩B |ψ1 ⟩ + c0 |c0 ⟩C |0⟩B |ψ0 ⟩.
   Step 4 (apply U † and overlap). Applying U † on (Y AB) and projecting onto ⟨0|C ⊗ ⟨y, 0a , 0| gives
                    ⟨z|U † R2 U R1 |z⟩ = |c1 |2 + cos ϕ |c0 |2 = p(y) + (1 − p(y)) cos ϕ,
which proves (4). Notice that the quantity is real and nonnegative for ϕ ∈ (0, π2 ). The bounds (6)-(7)
follow from the monotonicity of f (p) := p + (1 − p) cos ϕ.

                                                       21
   Given a QCMA instance x with verifier Wx and thresholds c > s, build Z from U := Wx as in
Theorem 5.4 using any fixed constant ϕ ∈ (0, π2 ) (e.g. ϕ = π/3). Set PCBS thresholds

                 δyes := f (c) = c + (1 − c) cos ϕ,        δno := f (s) = s + (1 − s) cos ϕ.

Then δyes − δno = (1 − cos ϕ)(c − s) ≥ 1/poly(N ), and:

               x ∈ L ⇐⇒ ∃ y : |⟨z|Z|z⟩| ≥ δyes        vs x ∈
                                                           / L ⇐⇒ ∀ y : |⟨z|Z|z⟩| ≤ δno ,

establishing QCMA-hardness. Together with our previous containment argument, this proves
Theorem 5.3. An immediate corollary of this theorem is:

Corollary 5.5. There exists no quantum polynomial-time algorithm that, given a generic poly(N )-
sized quantum circuit U (described classically), outputs the peaked input string with non-negligible
advantage than random guess, unless BQP = QCMA.

   This can be proved by contradiction: assume that a quantum polynomial-time (QPT) algorithm
can return the secret peaked input, then running the quantum circuit would generate the desired
peakedness, resolving PCBS.

5.2    Symmetric encryption with HQAP circuits
The QCMA-hardness in the previous section suggests that finding the peaked input–output pair of a
peaked circuit is hard even for quantum algorithms. This motivates using HQAP-generated circuits
as ciphertexts: in our obfuscation protocols, a quantum adversary is not expected to efficiently
identify the designated peaked input or output. Intuitively, hiding a single input–output pair among
exponentially many basis labels makes it difficult to locate without the trapdoor. We conjecture:

Conjecture 5.6 (Peak-Search Hardness (PSH)). There exist an efficient HQAP protocol which,
given (x⋆ , y ⋆ ) ∈ {0, 1}N × {0, 1}N and fresh coins ρ, the procedure HQAP(x⋆ , y ⋆ ; ρ) outputs a circuit
E such that measuring E |x⋆ ⟩ in the computational basis returns y ⋆ with probability at least δ ∈ (0, 1).
For all x ̸= x⋆ , the output distribution of E |x⟩ is not comparably concentrated on y ⋆ .
    Moreover, the security of this protocol is guaranteed in the adversarial setting: give the adversary
the classical description desc(E). Then no QPT outputs x⋆ (or the pair (x⋆ , y ⋆ )) with probability
better than 2−n + negl(n).

    Then with a slight modification to that HQAP circuit protocol can also be used for encrypting
messages with quantum-safe property. Here is a sketch of the protocol: Let k ∈ {0, 1}d be a
pre-shared key and Fk a pseudo random function (PRF) to derive per-block designated inputs. To
encrypt M , parse it into n-bit blocks s1 , . . . , st . For each block i:

   1. Publish a nonce ctri and set x⋆i := Fk (ctri ).

   2. Set yi⋆ := si (optionally, mask as si ⊕ Gk (ctri ) with an independent PRF G).

   3. Sample ρi and compute Ei ← HQAP(x⋆i , yi⋆ ; ρi ).

   4. Output ciphertext Ci := desc(Ei ), ctri .
                                             

The receiver decrypts by computing x⋆i = Fk (ctri ), running Ei on |x⋆i ⟩ for Ns = O(δ −2 ) shots, taking
the empirical mode ŷi , and
                          P outputting ŝi := ŷi . As a check, the receiver accepts only if the measured
peak weight pbpeak = N1s N   j=1 1{yi,j = ŷi } exceeds a threshold δmin .


                                                      22
    It’s not hard to see that the protocol remains secure under any QPT adversary against one-
wayness under chosen-plaintext attacks (OW-CPA): Assume PRF security for F and PSH for the
HQAP distribution. Given a ciphertext block Ci = (desc(Ei ), ctri ), recovering si requires either (a)
computing x⋆i = Fk (ctri ) (which breaks the PRF), or (b) finding x⋆i by probing Ei on inputs and
detecting the heavy output (which breaks PSH), then reading off yi⋆ and removing the mask via Gk
(which again requires the PRF). Thus, under PRF security and PSH, the scheme achieves OW-CPA.
    On the receiver side, checking if the output peakedness have reached a designated threshold
provides a practical sanity layer against malformed or dishonest ciphertexts. Beyond this, this HQAP
protocol offers three unique properties other PQC schemes may lack: (i) validity here is semantic,
an inherent property of how the ciphertext was generated and, crucially, receiver-local; (ii) the same
machinery naturally doubles as a proof-of-quantumness-flavored check; and (iii) unlike standardized
post-quantum cryptography (e.g., ML-KEM/ML-DSA/SLH-DSA) [1], which is deliberately classical
and deployable on today’s networks, our protocol is inherently quantum because decryption or
validation requires executing the public circuit on the designated input. Of course, these properties
hinge on an average-case PSH conjecture holding for our instance generation: this is precisely why
establishing rigorously or empirically testing on the hardness properties of HQAP circuits remain a
crucial open problem of broad applications.


6    Discussion
In this work, we have presented a protocol for constructing peaked quantum circuits that is both
scalable and verifiable. Our construction builds on the original peaked circuit framework by
introducing pre-processing steps and architectural refinements that allow these circuits to scale
well beyond previous instantiations, in both qubit number and circuit depth. Importantly, we have
designed specific circuits that stretch the computational limits of existing quantum processors while
fitting within the error budget. At the same time, we have implemented a suite of classical simulation
attack strategies, ranging from matrix product states to tensor network contraction methods to Pauli
path simulators, that represent the current state of the art in classical circuit simulation. Many of
these methods have been used in past work to challenge or reinterpret quantum advantage claims,
including those involving IBM’s utility-scale benchmarking efforts.
     These results offer a timely contribution to the evolving landscape of quantum advantage. It is
now broadly accepted that certain quantum processors can outperform classical computers on well-
posed computational tasks, at least in the absence of strong classical shortcuts. However, in the case
of RCS, these demonstrations are often based on output distributions that are difficult to interpret
or verify at scale. Our work addresses this gap by providing a construction in which the quantum
output is both easy to produce and easy to verify, yet remains classically intractable to simulate by
all known methods. This puts us in what might be described as the heuristic phase of quantum
advantage: a period in which empirical results, rather than unconditional complexity-theoretic proofs,
serve as the main form of evidence.
     In this sense, our peaked circuits occupy a role not unlike that of RSA in classical cryptography.
Just as the hardness of factoring large integers is widely believed, despite the lack of a formal proof,
because of decades of failed attempts to break it, the intractability of simulating peaked circuits
may come to be seen as an empirical fact.
     On the other hand, there may be continual progress on the theoretical side, bridging the gap
between what is provably hard and our constructions. In this work, we build on the existing literature
on the hardness of peaked circuits. In general, a peaked circuit may lead to concentration on a
particular output bitstring from an input state other than the all zeros case. When the input


                                                  23
bitstring is unknown, determining whether a given circuit is peaked is QCMA-hard. Establishing a
concrete connection between these complexity results and our existing construction would greatly
add to the strength of claims of quantum advantage.
    We do not claim that classical simulation of our peaked circuits is impossible. Indeed, further
analysis may reveal weaknesses in specific instances, or new classical algorithms may improve upon
current simulation strategies. But in the absence of such breakthroughs, we view these circuits as
offering a valuable benchmark for the quantum community. They provide a target that is both
meaningful and falsifiable, anyone who can simulate them classically is encouraged to do so (see
Section 7). In this way, our work is as much a challenge as it is a result. By continuing to scale
these constructions and openly testing their classical boundaries, we hope to sharpen the contours of
what practical quantum advantage looks like in the NISQ era.


7    Open Peaked Circuits challenge
We have observed a big gap between quantum and all known classical tenchiques, however we do
not exclude the possibility that a smarter classical technique exists. Hence we are announcing a
peaked circuits challenge, where we will be releasing increasingly difficult peaked circuits to cement
the runtime gap between quantum and classical solutions. These circuits can be found on BlueQubit
Peak Portal where anyone is welcome to submit their classical solutions as well. This is similar to
the RSA challenge announced in the 1990s and expanded in the 2000s [52], where the challenge was
to factor a large product of primes. The hardness of the challenge was never formally proved, but it
was heuristically agreed upon based on many tries from the community.


Acknowledgements
We thank the entire BlueQubit team for contributions to the BlueQubit SDK and, in particular, to
the Pauli Path and MPS simulators used for the classical simulations in this work. We are grateful
to the Quantinuum team – particularly its Startup Partner Program — for sustained support and
for facilitating access to the System Model H2 trapped-ion processor. We also thank Scott Aaronson
and Dima Abanin for numerous valuable discussions and feedback.


References
 [1] Lily Chen et al. Report on post-quantum cryptography. Vol. 12. US Department of Commerce,
     National Institute of Standards and Technology . . ., 2016.
 [2] Manoj Kumar and Pratap Pattnaik. “Post quantum cryptography (pqc)-an overview.” In: 2020
     IEEE High Performance Extreme Computing Conference (HPEC). IEEE. 2020, pp. 1–9.
 [3] David Joseph et al. “Transitioning organizations to post-quantum cryptography.” In: Nature
     605.7909 (2022), pp. 237–243.
 [4] Duc-Thuan Dam et al. “A survey of post-quantum cryptography: Start of a new race.” In:
     Cryptography 7.3 (2023), p. 40.
 [5] Scott Aaronson and Lijie Chen. “Complexity-Theoretic Foundations of Quantum Supremacy
     Experiments.” In: (Dec. 2016). arXiv: 1612.05903 [quant-ph].
 [6] Adam Bouland et al. “On the complexity and verification of quantum random circuit sampling.”
     In: Nature Phys. 15.2 (2018), pp. 159–163. doi: 10.1038/s41567-018-0318-2.


                                                 24
 [7] Dominik Hangleiter and Jens Eisert. “Computational advantage of quantum random sampling.”
     In: Rev. Mod. Phys. 95.3 (2023), p. 035001. doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.95.035001.
 [8] F. Arute, K. Arya, R. Babbush, et al. “Quantum supremacy using a programmable supercon-
     ducting processor.” In: Nature 574 (2019), pp. 505–510. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1666-5.
 [9] Yulin Wu et al. “Strong quantum computational advantage using a superconducting quantum
     processor.” In: Physical review letters 127.18 (2021), p. 180501.
[10] Qingling Zhu et al. “Quantum computational advantage via 60-qubit 24-cycle random circuit
     sampling.” In: Science bulletin 67.3 (2022), pp. 240–245.
[11] A. Morvan, B. Villalonga, X. Mi, et al. “Phase transitions in random circuit sampling.” In:
     Nature 634 (2024), pp. 328–333. doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07998-6.
[12] M. DeCross et al. “Computational Power of Random Quantum Circuits in Arbitrary Geometries.”
     In: Phys. Rev. X 15 (2 May 2025), p. 021052. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevX.15.021052.
[13] Scott Aaronson and Yuxuan Zhang. On verifiable quantum advantage with peaked circuit
     sampling. 2024. arXiv: 2404.14493 [quant-ph]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14493.
[14] Dominik Janzing, Pawel Wocjan, and Thomas Beth. “"Non-Identity-Check" is QMA-Complete.”
     In: International Journal of Quantum Information 03.03 (2005), pp. 463–473. doi: 10.1142/
     S0219749905001067.
[15] Zhengfeng Ji and Xiaodi Wu. Non-Identity Check Remains QMA-Complete for Short Circuits.
     2009. arXiv: 0906.5416 [quant-ph]. url: https://arxiv.org/abs/0906.5416.
[16] Yusei Mori et al. “Quantum circuit unoptimization.” In: Phys. Rev. Res. 7.2 (2025), p. 023139.
     doi: 10.1103/PhysRevResearch.7.023139.
[17] Román Orús. “A practical introduction to tensor networks: Matrix product states and projected
     entangled pair states.” In: Annals of Physics 349 (2014), pp. 117–158. issn: 0003-4916. doi:
     https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aop.2014.06.013.
[18] J. Ignacio Cirac et al. “Matrix product states and projected entangled pair states: Concepts,
     symmetries, theorems.” In: Rev. Mod. Phys. 93 (4 Dec. 2021), p. 045003. doi: 10 . 1103/
     RevModPhys.93.045003.
[19] R. Alkabetz and I. Arad. “Tensor networks contraction and the belief propagation algorithm.”
     In: Phys. Rev. Res. 3 (2 Apr. 2021), p. 023073. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevResearch.3.023073.
[20] Jacob Biamonte et al. “Quantum machine learning.” In: Nature 549.7671 (Sept. 2017), pp. 195–
     202. issn: 1476-4687. doi: 10.1038/nature23474.
[21] Joseph Tindall and Matt Fishman. “Gauging tensor networks with belief propagation.” In:
     SciPost Phys. 15 (2023), p. 222. doi: 10.21468/SciPostPhys.15.6.222.
[22] Patrick Rall et al. “Simulation of qubit quantum circuits via Pauli propagation.” In: Phys. Rev.
     A 99 (2019), p. 062337. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevA.99.062337.
[23] Dorit Aharonov et al. “A Polynomial-Time Classical Algorithm for Noisy Random Circuit
     Sampling.” In: Proceedings of the 55th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing
     (STOC ’23). See also arXiv:2211.03999 (2022). 2023. doi: 10.1145/3564246.3585234.
[24] Thomas Schuster et al. “A polynomial-time classical algorithm for noisy quantum circuits.” In:
     (July 2024). arXiv: 2407.12768 [quant-ph].
[25] Tomislav Begušić, Johnnie Gray, and Garnet Kin-Lic Chan. “Fast and converged classical
     simulations of evidence for the utility of quantum computing before fault tolerance.” In: Science
     Advances 10.3 (2024), eadk4321. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.adk4321.

                                                 25
[26] Tomislav Begušić, Kasra Hejazi, and Garnet Kin-Lic Chan. “Simulating quantum circuit
     expectation values by Clifford perturbation theory.” In: J. Chem. Phys. 162.15 (2025), p. 154110.
     doi: 10.1063/5.0269149.
[27] Tomislav Begušić and Garnet Kin-Lic Chan. “Real-Time Operator Evolution in Two and Three
     Dimensions via Sparse Pauli Dynamics.” In: PRX Quantum 6 (2 Apr. 2025), p. 020302. doi:
     10.1103/PRXQuantum.6.020302.
[28] Hrant Gharibyan et al. “A Practical Guide to using Pauli Path Simulators for Utility-Scale
     Quantum Experiments.” In: (July 2025). arXiv: 2507.10771 [quant-ph].
[29] Manuel S. Rudolph et al. “Pauli Propagation: A Computational Framework for Simulating
     Quantum Systems.” In: (May 2025). arXiv: 2505.21606 [quant-ph].
[30] Yuxuan Zhang. “Complexity and hardness of random peaked circuits.” In: (Sept. 2025). arXiv:
     2510.00132 [quant-ph].
[31] Abhinav Deshpande et al. “Peaked quantum advantage using error correction.” In: arXiv
     preprint arXiv:2510.05262 (2025).
[32] S. A. Moses et al. “A Race-Track Trapped-Ion Quantum Processor.” In: Physical Review X
     13.4 (Dec. 2023). issn: 2160-3308. doi: 10.1103/physrevx.13.041052.
[33] Ulrich Schollwock. “The density-matrix renormalization group in the age of matrix product
     states.” In: Annals of Physics 326.1 (2011). January 2011 Special Issue, pp. 96–192. issn:
     0003-4916. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aop.2010.09.012.
[34] Jarrod R. McClean et al. “Barren plateaus in quantum neural network training landscapes.” In:
     Nature Communications 9.1 (Nov. 2018). issn: 2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-07090-4.
[35] Johnnie Gray. “quimb: A python package for quantum information and many-body calculations.”
     In: Journal of Open Source Software 3.29 (2018), p. 819. doi: 10.21105/joss.00819.
[36] Johnnie Gray and Stefanos Kourtis. “Hyper-optimized tensor network contraction.” In: Quantum
     5 (2021), p. 410. doi: 10.22331/q-2021-03-15-410.
[37] Sergey Bravyi, David Gosset, and Yinchen Liu. “Classical simulation of peaked shallow quantum
     circuits.” In: Proceedings of the 56th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing. 2024,
     pp. 561–572.
[38] Zhengfeng Ji and Xiaodi Wu. “Non-identity check remains QMA-complete for short circuits.”
     In: arXiv preprint arXiv:0906.5416 (2009).
[39]   Quantum AI team and collaborators. qsim. Sept. 2020. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.4023103.
[40] Harun Bayraktar et al. “cuQuantum SDK: A High-Performance Library for Accelerating
     Quantum Science.” In: arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01999 (2023). doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2308.
     01999.
[41] Yifan Zhang and Yuxuan Zhang. “Classical simulability of quantum circuits with shallow magic
     depth.” In: PRX Quantum 6.1 (2025), p. 010337.
[42] E. Cuthill and J. McKee. “Reducing the bandwidth of sparse symmetric matrices.” In: Pro-
     ceedings of the 1969 24th National Conference. ACM ’69. New York, NY, USA: Association for
     Computing Machinery, 1969, pp. 157–172. isbn: 9781450374934. doi: 10.1145/800195.805928.
[43] F. Verstraete and J. I. Cirac. Renormalization algorithms for Quantum-Many Body Systems
     in two and higher dimensions. 2004. arXiv: cond- mat/0407066 [cond-mat.str-el]. url:
     https://arxiv.org/abs/cond-mat/0407066.


                                                 26
[44] Guifré Vidal. “Efficient Classical Simulation of Slightly Entangled Quantum Computations.”
     In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 91 (14 Oct. 2003), p. 147902. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.91.147902.
[45] Guifré Vidal. “Efficient Simulation of One-Dimensional Quantum Many-Body Systems.” In:
     Phys. Rev. Lett. 93 (4 July 2004), p. 040502. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.93.040502.
[46] G. Vidal. “Classical Simulation of Infinite-Size Quantum Lattice Systems in One Spatial
     Dimension.” In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 (7 Feb. 2007), p. 070201. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.98.
     070201.
[47] R. Orús and G. Vidal. “Infinite time-evolving block decimation algorithm beyond unitary
     evolution.” In: Phys. Rev. B 78 (15 Oct. 2008), p. 155117. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.78.155117.
[48] Ali Javadi-Abhari et al. Quantum computing with Qiskit. 2024. arXiv: 2405.08810 [quant-ph].
     url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.08810.
[49] H. C. Jiang, Z. Y. Weng, and T. Xiang. “Accurate Determination of Tensor Network State
     of Quantum Lattice Models in Two Dimensions.” In: Phys. Rev. Lett. 101 (9 Aug. 2008),
     p. 090603. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.101.090603.
[50] Saeed S. Jahromi and Román Orús. “Universal tensor-network algorithm for any infinite lattice.”
     In: Phys. Rev. B 99 (19 May 2019), p. 195105. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.99.195105.
[51] Pawel Wocjan, Dominik Janzing, and Thomas Beth. “Two QCMA-complete problems.” In:
     arXiv preprint quant-ph/0305090 (2003).
[52] Burt Kaliski. “RSA factoring challenge.” In: Encyclopedia of Cryptography and Security. Ed. by
     Henk C. A. van Tilborg. Boston, MA: Springer US, 2005, pp. 531–532. isbn: 978-0-387-23483-0.
     doi: 10.1007/0-387-23483-7_362.




                                                27
